[Music]
[Applause]
hey guys today I want to introduce you
to Brian Bates of Bear Creek organic
farm this video you're gonna see today
is a series of edits from the original
interview I did with him that I posted
from the field dot farm last week that
video is an hour and 42 minutes long and
it's long-form interview and tour of the
farm these guys are absolutely crushing
it Brian has an entrepreneurial attitude
that is similar to what you might see in
venture capital or tech the guy is a is
a true entrepreneur and he doesn't think
like a farmer and I don't mean that to
do great farmers because I'm a farmer
too but the way he thinks about systems
and his business is unlike most growers
that I know he is truly an entrepreneur
and he thinks big and he's scaling his
business these guys do their on less
than three acres of land in fact last
year they were only on two and they did
four hundred and ten thousand dollars in
gross revenue now that really only
leaves about ten percent profit but they
pay all of their employees forty
thousand dollars a year so the crew is
paid very well and he runs this like a
business and there's five things I've
identified that I want to go over right
now before I just kind of leave it to
Brian but there's five things that I've
identified that he does that make them
successful the first thing is they focus
on relatively high value crops now it's
a fairly large farm as far as market
gardens are concerned it's just under
three acres now
of production and they grow things like
garlic and tomatoes but the bread and
butter does come from there microgreens
and their salad greens and Brian will
kind of get into the details of those
the second thing they do is they have
fairly low maintenance and scalable
market streams and this is they because
they've focused on retail markets and
they're not having to go and sell all
the stuff at farmer's markets they're
there they're in market streams where
they can leverage their brand power to
scale the customer demand and all the
stores that they're in and they're in a
small community the Petoskey Michigan is
I think it's like six thousand people
it's a tiny tiny area and they're just
moving this much product in retail
that's amazing the third thing is
they're doing year-round production this
is a totally high tunnel based operation
that is doing a lot of these crops
year-round particularly the microgreens
and also the salad mixes and greens that
they have in those high tunnels the
fourth thing is they pay the crew very
well so they're each getting forty
thousand dollars a year and some people
might say oh well that's just that's a
way to kill the business if you're
paying people that well well what I saw
when I was there is a real consolidated
team effort you've got people that feel
a sense of ownership on the farm and I
think that creates a synergy on their
farm that allows them to do things that
many others wouldn't do in the sense
that only the owner would feel the
responsibility to take on certain tasks
but Brian's got his crew doing all this
and yeah there's pros and cons to that
he'll talk about that but that's the
fourth thing the fifth thing probably
the most important thing here is they're
running this like up business brian says
this many times throughout the the
interview but he really takes this
seriously and he thinks about it
a lot differently than most farmers in
the sense that they take on loans there
I think they were putting in another
four hundred thousand dollars of
infrastructure just this year on the
farm they're scaling this puppy and
they're really going for the gold
and you don't see that in farming that
often so those are the five things and
you know I've visited a lot of market
gardens over the years and I have to say
these guys are the number one that I've
seen as far as how you can scale a
business how you can grow a Market
Garden and there's no benefactor here
like they're they're getting loans just
like any other small business would
their self funding this and they're
letting the market guide where they go
and that's what I really liked about
Brian's approach was his totally market
driven approach amazing stuff
you'll be you're gonna see it in this
video but Brian was the first person I'd
seen do this pac-man style planting with
Sal anova with the paper pot
transplanter where they basically plant
a bunch of rows with no walkways and
then you harvest it and you walk on what
you harvested Brian was the first one to
do that and he demonstrates that in this
video there's a ton of value in these in
this short video but if you are a member
at from the field dot farm make sure to
watch the one hour and 42 minutes long
interview I did with Brian last week all
right guys enjoy I'm very surprised to
see what I did when I came in here all
these microgreens like as you described
the place that you're in and the
demographic you're dealing with it's
it's it like yeah moving a lot of
product that is fairly niche market
product in a market place that I would
not expect did you when you were setting
this up did you have to do a lot of
education to your customers to get
people on board because I quite frankly
I'm surprised that you've had this much
success and you're moving this much
production this early in the game like
only six years in how did you how did
you find these customers are there a
bunch of greenies that live around here
that under this or
so I we run a very market driven farm so
we were not like we're gonna build a
farm around lettuce and tomatoes and
microgreens and people are gonna buy it
and we're gonna educate them until they
buy it
that's not our approach we had never
heard of microgreens when I started a
farm but we wanted to start plants
earlier in this greenhouse and we
thought man the propane bill is really
expensive to start tomatoes for which
you don't see a crop until July yeah so
we were like maybe there's something we
can grow this a little faster yeah and
we're at a farmers market in the winter
in Wisconsin
and they were selling microgreens at the
farmers market okay at this point we've
heard of microgreens but is this really
fancy niche crop you know fancy chefs
high-end restaurants but these folks
were selling my greens like straight to
their customers and we thought well it's
interesting they're selling what we
consider a fancy crop to regular
customers and all is it dramatically
cheaper is still pretty expensive but
this sort of light bulb went off now I
will say a light bulb enough my wife
will say she's been telling me this for
years that the two versions every story
she's probably you know she's probably
mostly right on that but I was just like
there's no market for it
yeah the mental switch was we thought we
were gonna grow and we start with two
flats two flats a week bring them to
market cut them at market get people
trying for flats yeah eight flats by the
end of the first year we receiving like
sixty flats a week now we'll seed 600
flats a week in the summer okay so but
it's important you know I see a lot of
you were getting into microgreens game
we did not start with 600 plants we did
not start thinking this green house
would be full of microgreens
we start with two flats of buckwheat
because which we don't even grow anymore
yeah like it seemed like a good one so
we started small and the big shift was
we thought we'd be marketing it as like
super nutritious this like super food
marketing and our customers like yeah
that's cool but like there's kale and
spinach too and the shift was its
convenience
it's convenience food yeah you made your
whole dinner for you and your family you
forgot to add a salad or vegetable put
some microgreens on it yeah you were
making a sandwich for lunch real quick
you've just got some deli meats in Mayo
put some broccoli micros on and so all
of a sudden you know we started
encroaching on like people who are
already buying sprouts and talking about
singing the praises of microgreens
compared to sprouts and then also just
like if you're already eating baby
greens saying look we can't
realistically have a great selection of
baby greens for four months of winter
but we can do microgreens and so then we
started marketing this as just like
basically like really tiny salad mix
yeah I mean and so so the vast majority
and I'm saying in terms of pounds sold
probably 75% of our microgreens are
going to individual customers not some
of these not chefs about half of our
sales are to grocery stores now talking
to you now yeah almost 50% of our sales
are the groceries
okay and so we are selling these in
individual you know 2 ounce containers
to the grocery store yeah and then 30
percent of our sales is at farmer's
market we had 10 to farmers markets a
week Friday and Saturday for 4 hours
each 52 weeks here yeah so we go to the
two markets year-round that's 30% 50%
grocery 30% farmers market and then we
do about 10% with restaurants and across
the whole year so it's not it's way more
in the summer barely anything in the
winter and then the other 10% is our
plant sale like are like yeah garden you
know starts and stuff in the spring
which is just a two and a half week
flash sale in our greenhouse we've
people come out by all the organic
plants go home and garden with them and
so it's like two and a half weeks Wow
yeah that's that's that's really cool
it's an insane turn f weeks you know our
town is 6,000 people it's not the area
so who's your guys's market then yeah
basically our neighbors yeah so unlike
so many market farms that we looked at
and and like learned from and and worked
on or whatever a lot of
them were a small farm on sort of the
urban and suburban fringe selling into a
large area I'm thinking like Twin Cities
Madison Wisconsin Chicago you know
Philadelphia like all these sort of your
outside selling in yeah and our town is
6,000 people our county is 30,000 so
we're not pulling from a huge amount of
people we are in a summer tourist
destination yeah so there's a bunch of
people that come up you know up north
for the summer so we have like
restaurant accounts in the summer that
buy things that no restaurant would buy
up here in the winter like they are
doing higher-end short term cuisine and
then they shut down so there's this sort
of brief moment but also we're in a very
cold climate and so that's why we've
doubled down on greenhouses and hoop
houses because we figured those are
never going out of style we have a very
cold climate and so being able to have
that jumpstart on spring and grow things
when people sort of expect it a little
less often makes a big difference at the
center of the pack van clanking do you
do you call it that or and I don't make
that up okay okay
term confuse kept asking me how do you
walk down it's funny because I that's
how I just thought about it I didn't I
didn't hear you say back then
yeah I was just like it is like the game
pac-man yeah you're going like that cos
yes yeah so this is this is an example
of like you know not perfect
everything's not perfect
we got some tree to sleep off the green
sweet about the green sweet is the
fastest and the heaviest and we're just
switching we used to use that red in
sight switching to the red crispy yeah
yeah yeah yeah and so you can see
there's some chickweed pressure in here
so pac-man or just designee where do I
call the peck it tends to be more of a
calculated risk in the spring because
the weed pressure can be higher in the
fall which is when we started doing this
it's non-existent it's flawless and so
most of the photos that will put on like
our website
those are fall play yeah yeah right this
prettiest and weed pressure but the
other thing that we know about the
spring is we're going to be either
smothering or tilling right after and so
we just need to basically be easy enough
to harvest and then we'll deal with so
kind of easy enough to harvest and then
we'll deal with it and then this tunnel
was the first one planted so we keep it
minimally heated above freezing and so
because we keep it above freezing but
below 40 at night we moved Isuzu in a
space of greenhouse first thing we do is
to take all the alliums and move them in
here these are paper Padres onions and
move them in here because they don't
need they don't need really warm
temperatures and we just had a temporary
space just sawhorses a purlin pipe yeah
and so once you are you doing multiple
cuts on this or is it Oh in the spring
it depends on yes we can but lots of
times we've got tomatoes that are
busting to get in here so we do one cut
and then we start plans okay with one of
our hopes with building these new
tunnels is that we are will do a little
bit less of that and just getting a
second cut will be worth a lot to us so
this one will be one cut because
tomatoes are coming in as soon as we're
done the other tunnel of sound over that
we've got that'll be two cups so this is
like what you said about this is cut you
come in with that that auger hole you
don't care about the paper chains
leftover whatever and you just till this
stuff in right yep yeah yeah and so yeah
and so our early crops would go in our
tomatoes and our slightly later ones our
cucumbers and basil so the talent of a
tunnel that will get a double cut from
there's no rush because we'll put the
cutes and basil in later the tomatoes we
want to get in ASAP yeah so yeah and so
we have overhead irrigation and all the
tunnels for when it's sound over our
spinach and then we just run drip when
it's tomatoes cute some basil yeah well
like the logistics of Bear Creek how
many people working maybe like how many
beds or production are you on a standard
100 foot bed or because your tractor
you're just doing long rows whatever
right yeah yeah just talking you know
sort of like by the numbers like
breakdown yo full worker wise we're at
about eight full-time in the season yeah
full-time in the season and the winter
there's four of us full time and part of
that is we have work and part of that is
that's our core I'm counting myself on
the floor part of that is the the four
of us are like the core management team
and we can do every task on the farm and
so it's part planning going to
conference it together giving each other
vacation time so
it's managing winter and then we add
like four in the summer so basically
eight on the high end people make like
21 an hour on the low end they make 10
10 is just a short-term apprentice any
full-time worker starts at 1250 yeah and
and then for that core team I've tied
that we actually all agreed to tie our
salaries together you know I make the
same as them
well so if one of them wants to raise
all of us need to get a raise and we go
through the budget and look at what's
possible so yeah so we all make 40 grand
a year plus bonuses and Benny's so we do
that so that's the workforce and
everybody is local so we're not doing
like we don't have free interns from a
field you know everybody's here even if
they're an intern or an apprentice
they're usually from here either in
between high school and college or back
for the summer whatever and then all the
other workers live here so we have no
sort of out-of-state interns and we have
no like h-2a workers or any sort of
migrant workers anything like that so
that's the workforce and historically
payroll has been about like 30 percent
of our gross sales and our hope is that
if we pay off some capital debts that
number can creep up we're not
rooting for payroll to go up but it's
one of those things where we really want
to take care of our people don't grow
into our people and so you know I'm not
looking at that and saying oh my god
payrolls way too high you know we that's
how we make money I am on payroll I get
a check deposit into my account it is
not like an owner's draw whenever
there's a bunch of money in July it is
very very consistent and it's hard to
manage the cash flow so that we get the
same paycheck in January that we get in
July right that's really hard so that's
the best the staff side of things
growth wise or sales wise we're growing
last year we did like 410 so that lay
410-thousand gross sales yep and that
was on like a little under 2 acres so
it's pretty high value production but a
lot of it's like you know greenhouse and
hoop house stuff
we have a quarter acre in hoop houses
that's and that's pure square footage
I'm sorry yeah it's almost more than
that it's gotta be more than that you
got four big it's sixteen seventeen
thousand square feet okay it's closer to
fifty percent yeah it's almost half acre
yep so that's in hoop houses and then
this green house is our only greenhouse
is thirty by 1/10 3300 square feet this
is the only structure we grow 52 weeks a
year in and halfway down we put up a
temporary curtain in the winter so we're
just using the fun 1/2 and not heating
any more than we need yeah gross sales
are right over 4,000 this year they
should be right around like five hundred
twenty-five thousand something like that
we've grown about a hundred thousand a
year for the last five years well and
the fuel productions are really really
small part of what we do so we just put
the beds where the beds go yeah and the
field is basically just garlic is the
dominant field entity and our field
production is basically always four
times the amount of space garlic takes
up because we're having a four year
rotation yeah so this year we have a
Hackett 1/2 acre of garlic so we plowed
some new area so that we have 2 acres
total out there so you've got a half
acre for four years you follow it yep
yeah so that's that and then whatever is
not in garlic is basically in Sal Innova
romaine kale and some onions and that's
field production you run this like a
scalable business we're trying to
professionalize the field yeah yeah
that's the goal around it like a
business I mean that and and and treat
it like a business get respect like a
business and we've done some business
awards from our local Chamber of
Commerce things like that to me mean a
lot because we're trying to do more than
just be like grandpappies farm like
we're trying to make this a business
with decent paying job
they can come to work and have a good
job and it's productive somehow it's
felt really good yeah yeah but just in
closing where should people go to find
out more about you guys
Instagram and Facebook Instagram for
sure yeah we're just at Bear Creek
organic farm we post every day of the
week at least Monday through Saturday 52
weeks a year we're pretty accessible we
try to reply to all the comments and you
know get people to show people parts of
the farm and it's been we've learned so
much from Instagram from other farmers
we love just trying to like put some
more information back out there it's a
little bit of a weird hybrid marketing
though because we're sharing stuff
that's interesting to other farmers but
we're really trying to sell to our
customers so we're kind of always toeing
that line so we're not getting into like
soil tests and stuff like that but we
will show people things that are cool
and so yeah instagram has really
benefitted our part we love that do you
do you guys have a ring like here you
yeah so right so it's all yep so we have
no farmstand nothing like that but we do
monthly farm tours May through October
and that Skinner's on our website and
we've had people drive up here from Ohio
and wherever just to come on a tour and
then you know we can if we got time
we'll stay and chat with them or
whatever yeah
but yeah we do the tours every every
month in the evening we're update today
and it's just great is this a fun time
to go show people in the farm and we
have tons of field trips and regular
things like that but yeah you know
you've learned a new era where you have
to you can't just do something
interesting you need to show people
that's interesting and then tell them
why it's interesting and then do it
basically every week is that hey if you
guys like that make sure to follow them
on social media and I know Brian does
tours on the farm check out their
website I have all the links below in
the show notes see you in the next video
[Music]